# opioid-overdose-project
Opioid overdose EDA
The purpose of this EDA was to analyze opioid overdose deaths and its determinants. In addition, I looked at overdose prevention services and compared the number of services among the States with similar death rates or numbers or the growth of the rate.   
This EDA includes three datasets from Kaggle. The Multiple Cause of Death 1999-2014 document includes data on overdose deaths numbers, rates, populations, and prescriptions by State and by year for 1999-2014 period. The Wide Master document has data on deaths numbers, total and by drug (heroin, other and methadone). The dataset also has numbers of people with different levels of education such as high school and less than high school, graduate, bachelor, post-graduate and associate degree education. Many economic indicators, such as GDP, GDP for education and other social spheres, unemployment rates, number of non-US born populations, income, and many other data features. Finally, the CDC Injury Center Drug Overdose Deaths dataset has data for age adjusted deaths rates and several economic indicators such as poverty rates, inequality coefficients, GDP and proportion of urban population by US State and by year for the period of 2013 to 2019.  
Additionally, I used one dataset that had data on services availability in each State from the official site of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 
Data cleaning.
The data, especially for the earlier years of the epidemic, had missing data that was coded as Suppressed which officially means that it is missing due to potential confidentiality issues. Replacing this data with the means had a potential of elevating rates since some of the missing numbers were at the beginning of the reporting period. For example, for North Dakota, three of the six missing numbers were for 1999-2002. North Dakota’s 2014 rate was 34 and the first available rate was 17. I replaced missing values with the means of the previous and following years. For the missing data that did not have previous or following year, I replaced it with the closest following or preceding year. Then I recalculated the crude rate. The number of deaths in the dataset was a float number and, for some States, it returned a float for the number of deaths, but I was interested in the crude rate and did not change the datatype for this. 
EDA
I looked at the data by the State and by the number of deaths and by the crude rate, maximum number and rate. The dataset for 1999 to 2014 showed that Ohio had the highest number of deaths in 2014 of 2,175 and West Virginia had the highest rate of 32 in 2011. In 2014, West Virginia had the highest crude rate too, but it was a little lower than in 2011. I added a column to see the 15-year change in the crude rate and West Virginia had the highest increase in the crude deaths rate between 1999 and 2014 of 29.7 points. 
The analysis showed high correlation between the number of deaths and the prescriptions of opioid. However, the graph in the jupyter notebook shows that both numbers were increasing at a similar pace until 2012 when prescription numbers dropped significantly but deaths numbers grew even at a higher pace. After adding population numbers to  numbers of deaths and numbers of prescription, all three features grew during these period and when we look at both prescription and deaths rates, correlations are lost.
During the period of 2013 to 2019 (CDC data), the highest age-adjusted deaths rate of 52.8 was registered in West Virginia in 2019.  The States of Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland and West Virginia had the highest growth in the rates during this period. Ohio also reported one of the highest opioid overdose death rates with the rate of 38.3. In West Virginia, prescription rates had a negative correlation with both the number and rate of overdose deaths. 
West Virginia was an outlier for the deaths rate and the rate growth and, by using the describe function in python, I compared some economic data for West Virginia and the whole country. The mean poverty rate in West Virginia is 16 (12 for all States), gini coefficient of income inequality is 0.4711 (0.4661 for all States) and GDP per capita 47,833 (67,222 for all States). These differences were not statistically significant though. Urban populations as a percentage of total population (48.7 in WV and 75.1 in the country) and population density (29.6 in WV and 159.3 in the country) are important indicators to consider for how services are provided and whether there are enough service points especially in smaller towns and villages.
A pairplot graph of correlations showed positive correlation between crude total deaths rates and unemployment rate and a positive correlation between crude total death rate and income. There are different levels of correlation of crude death rate and proportions of populations with different levels of education. For example, there is negative correlation of the crude death rate and proportion of populations with bachelor, graduate and associate degrees.  There is a positive correlation of the crude death rate and the proportion of populations with only high school and less than high school education. 
There is also negative correlation of the crude death rate and the proportion of population which is non-US born. In the States with higher non-US born populations, the crude death rate was lower which may mean that migrant population selecting the States with higher income potential. 
The analysis of availability of overdose prevention service in each State showed that in the States with higher death rates there is higher number of services provided. However, West Virginia with the highest rate of overdose death and the highest growth of these rates during these two time periods had only nine services points and was among the States with the least service points and the lowest service coefficient, which I calculated as the number of services providers per 100,000 population and then per 1000 death. The States that had negative growth or lowest rates had 3 -10-time higher service coefficient than in West Virginia. In addition, it is not clear if West Virginia has medication assisted therapy service points.  
Mapping
I built maps using geopandas and choropleth. Geolocation data for all the States were taken from Kaggle. The interactive map using choropleth shows that the opioid overdose epidemic started in the Western States and then moved to the Eastern States. 
Summary and next steps
The three data contain different indicators to measure death rate. It would be great to get data with the same indicators for the period of when the epidemic started until now. The data on opioid prescriptions were different in different resources. The opioid prescription data for 1999-2014 was in the same dataset as the deaths numbers but it showed the same numbers for the same years for all States which means these were national numbers by year. However, Google search provided different numbers for opioid prescriptions. For the period of 2014 and 2019, I found opioid prescription numbers with population numbers different from the ones that I used in this notebook. 
In addition, the data for services availability from the SAMHSA web-site was different from Google search data but I used the official data. Service coverage may be better in West Virginia and in other states since this dataset was collected. 
I would like to use machine learning to see if I can calculate optimized service delivery or service points but additional data on how the services were developing by year would be necessary. 

